>> Anjana Vakil: The next tool that we're
gonna start adding to our toolbox is
higher-order functions.
And the concept of higher-order functions
goes hand in hand with the concept
of first-class functions,
and JavaScript has both.
And so what we're gonna be doing is
using some higher-order functions like,
filter map and
reduce to make some delicious sandwiches.
We'll talk about this in a moment.
And understand how their illustrations
of what a higher-order function is, and
what first class functions are, and why
they're useful for functional programming.
>> Anjana Vakil: Okay, so
first-class and higher-order functions.
We say a language has
first-class functions if it
supports us taking a function
that's been defined,
and sending it around
like a regular value.
The same as a string or
a number or what have you.
So if I can pass a function as an input
argument to another function, for
example, that means that the language I'm
working in has first-class functions.
Cuz I can use a function just like
any other value, and guess what?
JavaScript has first-class functions
that you all have already taken
advantage of I think, for example,
by writing a callback function.
So when we pass a callback function to,
let's say,
set up an event listener
on an element in the DOM.
We pass in a function that every time
somebody clicks on that button or
what have you,
JavaScript will run that function for us.
So it's taking in the function as a value,
it's not calling the function yet,
it's not handling a click yet
when I attach a listener.
It's just going to remember that function,
put it in its pocket,
save it for later, and
then do whatever it needs to do with it.
Just like a regular value,
like a string or a number.
So you all have already taken advantage
of the fact that JavaScript is
a language with first-class functions.
And when we have a function that operates
on functions that either takes them
as input or returns them as output,
we call that a higher-order function.
It's a function that's like one level
above the function it takes in, or
returns or multiple functions or
what have you.
So higher-order functions
are something that we spend
a lot of time working with
in functional programming,
because everything is a function
in pure functional programming.
And so we're kinda passing around
our functions here and there.
Just like the way that we
passed in a logical operator to
our truth table function earlier,
that sort of thing.
Or the same way that you could define
a function like handle click and
pass it into a bunch of different
calls to add event listener on click.
Okay, so
now in functional programming land,
for example, when we wanna
manipulate an array of values,
do something with it
instead of using iteration,
which we said is taboo in
the functional programming world.
Because it has state,
and state is dangerous,
unpredictable, gives me headaches, etc.
We are going to exercise
our newly found skills with
recursion to use functions like map,
reduce and filter.
Which you might be familiar
with because they're also
built in methods on JavaScript arrays.
But instead of using
those built in methods,
we're gonna re-implement
them functionally.
Okay, so map, reduce and filter,
have folks worked with JavaScript
array.map.filter, yeah.
Okay, great, so my favorite way of
thinking about filter, map, and reduce and
what they do.
And illustrating this is a graphic that
someone else, I can't take credit for
this, I just adapted it,
made called the MapReduce sandwich and
I just added the filter.
So filter, map, reduce is these
three functions all take in,
they're all higher order functions,
they all receive a function as input.
And they all apply that function
to elements in an array, but
they do different things.
So filter takes in a function that
we call a predicate function.
Which means,
the predicate function is going to
receive a single element from the array,
and
it's going to return a Boolean value,
either true or false.
So for example, let's say I have
an array of possible sandwich
ingredients here, and
I give a filter a predicate function
like Anjana wants in her sandwich,
this thing, right?
Or Anjana thinks this is tasty,
or Anjana has this at home and
doesn't need to go to the grocery store,
that sort of thing, right?
So for each element in the array,
filter is then gonna call that function on
the element and find out true or false.
And then for the elements that return
true, they pass the filter and for
the elements that return false,
they are filtered out.
So, for example, I can give it
this array of ingredients and
say Anjana likes X and it will filter out,
let's say cucumbers and
onions, even though that's not factual.
I do both of those things, but
whatever, for the sake of example.
And it's going to give us a shorter array,
essentially, now it might be the same
length, but it's certainly not
gonna have anything new in it,
at most,
can have everything in the original array.
Then, if we take that array of
carefully filtered ingredients,
and pass it to the map function,
we are also going to get a new array out,
but this time,
we're going to transform each
of the elements in the array.
So map is gonna take in a function,
but unlike filter, it's not gonna be
a predicate function that takes a value
and always returns true or false.
Instead, map is gonna take something more
like a transform function that takes in
a value and returns a different value.
It might be the same as the original,
it might not, depends on the function.
So, for example, I could pass
in the value of chop up to map,
as a function that takes a thing and
chops it up and returns a bunch of slices.
And map is gonna call that on
every element in my array, and
it's gonna return an array
of all the chopped things.
So bread becomes chopped bread,
tomato becomes chopped tomato, etc.
Okay, so far, hopefully this is a sort
of review, cuz these are often a regular
part of our day to day JavaScript lives,
calling array.filter, array.map, etc.
Reduce is also in there,
have folks work with reduce also?
>> Speaker 2: Yeah.
>> Anjana Vakil: A little bit, yeah.
Okay, some folks are big fans, others
I'm seeing a little more hesitation,
but it's a little bit different
because instead of filter and map,
they take an array and return an array.
And reduce takes an array, but
it returns a single value,
essentially, it reduces an array of
a bunch of stuff, reduces it to one thing.
And so the type of function that reduce
takes in is called a reducer, cleverly.
And this is kind of
a special type of function
that basically is gonna get two things,
sort of the reduced value I already know.
And the new element I wanna
add to that reduction, and
it's going to apply the reducer
to return a single thing.
So for example, let's say I have
a reducer function called stack or
layer, layer these things.
And what that's gonna do is,
if I give it bread and peppers,
it's gonna layer
the peppers into the bread.
And so what this is gonna do is,
it's gonna keep applying to each of these
elements successively in the array, and
it's gonna keep layering them one on top
of the other on top of
the other until we've finished.
And we have one delicious
multi-layer sandwich to
chow down on,
after all of our hard brain work.